---
layout: post
title:  "Lecture: On Institutions/the Retreat (2014)"
date:   2014-07-14 20:49:11 +0100
categories: jekyll update
excerpt: "About Belgium, not because I am Belgian, but because of the country's
possibilities as a place of retreat. Belgium is a federal state with
communities, regions and language areas. This means that there is a
federal government that is responsible for the entire country and
includes: taxation, justice, foreign affairs, social security and
pensions. There are three communities, based on language. "
---

This part of this presentation is about Belgium -- based on a youtube
video and my own experience.

About Belgium, not because I am Belgian, but because of the country's
possibilities as a place of retreat. Belgium is a federal state with
communities, regions and language areas. This means that there is a
federal government that is responsible for the entire country and
includes: taxation, justice, foreign affairs, social security and
pensions. There are three communities, based on language. Belgium has
three official languages: Dutch, French and German, and therefore there
are three communities. [The Flemish Community, authorized for the Dutch
language area and it also exercises authority in the bilingual
Brussels-Capital area. The French Community, authorized for the French
language area and it also exercises authority in the bilingual
Brussels-Capital area and the German Community, authorized for the
German language area. Each community has a government and a parliament
that is responsible for personal matters such as culture, education,
welfare, health, sports and language.

The three regions are: the Flemish
Region, this coincides with the Dutch language area, the Walloon Region
covers the French and German language areas and the Brussels-Capital
Region which is authorized in the bilingual Brussels-Capital
area. Each region has a government and a
parliament that is responsible for territorial matters such as the
environment, urban planning, housing, mobility, infrastructure, economy
and employment. In addition to the federal government, the communities
and regions, there are also local governments, like those of the
provinces and the cities.

There is a lot of confusion. On our
National Holiday in 2007 the press asked the then Prime Minister to sing
the Brabançonne -- the Belgian national anthem -- and he sang the
Marseillaise, the French one. I grew up in Flanders which is
monolingual: we spoke Dutch. I lived under the Flemish community and
region. Upon moving to Brussels things changed. In this institutional
framework I had no idea to what part I belonged. I spoke Dutch
(Flemish), and had an education organized by the Flemish community, but
I used the library of the French speaking university, governed by the
French community. The Brussels Capital Region collected my garbage. I
paid my taxes on a federal level, for a job I did in the Flemish
community. My house was under the rules of the Brussels Capital Region,
but when there were elections for the regions and communities, I had to
vote for the Flemish regions, even though I lived in Brussels. I did not
even know the politicians from the Brussels region or the French part.
My public transportation card was given out by the Brussels Capital
Region, but I travelled for free because I was a student supported by
the Flemish region.

I belonged to all communities and
regions and to none. I could have easily vanished for one community,
while it would think I'd be part of another one. The complexity of this
action might be more difficult, but I always felt that disappearing in
this institutional madness was a
possibility.

This part of this presentation I took from the French philosopher
Catherine Malabou's lecture at a program called The Retreat at Documenta
13 -- which is sort of an odd title since it is located at Banff in
Canada, which is more of an elitist art hub than an actual place of
retreat. At one point in her presentation she starts talking about her
three heroes of the retreat. The three great figures of the retreat:
Maurice Blanchot, Alexander Grothendieck and Thomas Bernhardt.

</uploads/2015/09/2-Catherine-Malabou-1.m4a>

This part of this lecture-presentation I took from an interview between
Stephen Wright and theorist Alexander Koch. The latter published in 2011
GENERAL STRIKE, a publication that sketches the act of 'dropping out of
art'.

He answers, you are right to ask to what extent this decision (to
retreat) has a critical dimension. Remember all those classical gestures
of refusal in art: empty canvases, closed galleries, silent artists. I
see that sort of silence as a fundamental mistrust in arts' contribution
to social and individual change. I wondered if emptiness, silence or
announced attacks on museums were already the radical peak of such
distrust. And I found that there was a possible step further to imagine:
just leaving the canvases, museums, and artworld as a whole, alone with
themselves and seeking out other endeavours. But then how would we know
about such steps, once they were taken?

This part of this presentation is about my work as a research for the
possibilities of withdrawal from the institutions of art.\
*In the last Guggenheim International Exhibition in NY in 1971, Daniel
Buren hung a huge banner of* *20 by 10 meters in the museum's rotunda.
Some of the other artists in the exhibition, like Donald Judd and Dan
Flavin, complained that the banner blocked the view, and that their
works had to deal with this unwillingly. Buren notified that Flavin's
fluorescent lights also unwillingly coloured his banner.\
*My interest in the retreat comes from institutional critique. I thought
it to be fascinating to work with an institution while commenting on it
at the same time, and that this institution would actually like that
(except for the case above, Daniel Buren got thrown out of that
exhibition). But institutional critique is not really retreating. It is
known for reflecting the art world's ideological framework back onto
itself. It stays inside the place that it critiques. Andrea Fraser
famously says that there is no outside of the art context. To critique
the institute means at the same time that you inevitably participate in
the institute. And what happens outside the field of art can have no
effect within it. She says: 'We are the institution of art'. That is a
rather depressing thought, but it may also be obsolete as it is
connected to Institutional Critique in the late '80 and '90. Perhaps the
idea of 'withdrawal' might create some possibilities. Not as a new form
of IC, for it does not necessary imply a critique, but as a way of
keeping distance without disconnecting -- and from that position
question institutional structures. And it can happen on many
levels. There are and have been numerous artist initiatives and art
collectives that are experimenting with the idea of withdrawing through
making alternative institutions or platforms. So did I.

This part of this presentation is part of a lecture by the American
artist Oscar Tuazon at The New School for Public Engagement. By
introducing Burt and Holly Davis, he explains their really brutal
project of hardcore retreat.

<!-- TODO: Upload this audio file -->
<!-- /uploads/2015/09/OT-on-BH_1-2-3.m4a> -->

This part of this presentation is about my work as a research for
withdrawal from the making of an artwork and the rules of the art
world.

One of the most recent works I made was part of the end exam exhibition
of the school I was graduating from. The graduation is the moment where
the transition between art school and art world happens, where young
artists make their first steps outside of the school, hoping to find
galleries, buyers, museums, further education, residencies etc that
might give them a chance. This all is very common, but I had no interest
in getting picked up like that. I wanted to take a step back and not
correspond to the needs of the set structures, of the institutional
rules and -- in extension -- of the market. I wanted to look at
everything from a distance, but not directly comment on it. I wanted to
try another possibility. It had to be withdrawal without loosing contact
with the context of the exhibition. Therefore, I needed to find a
location that was not in use for the show, but that would still have an
important function for and in the show. I found two storage spaces on
two different floors of the building where all the objectionable objects
for an exhibition get stored. Location-wise, this giant repository
created the buffer I needed. But the idea of withdrawal had to be
discussed as well. Therefore, I collected specific fragments from
lectures, interviews and readings by artists, art historians, theorists,
curators and critics. The pieces of audible text were montaged next to
each other into a sound piece as a collection of thoughts, ideas and
sayings. They offered possibilities to 'withdraw' and formed a dialogue.
With each other, but also with the context they found themselves in. The
repository of text resonated with the physical repository of the storage
space. One more element was added, a list on an A4 paper containing all
the sources used. The fact that the work was almost invisible, and that
there was no artist connected to it, made that basically most people
walked right passed it. It generated a group of very little people that
wanted to be there. That wanted to spend time with the work. People that
came looking for it.

This part of this presentation is a definition of 'the retreat' that I
took from the introductory text for the program The Retreat at Documenta 13.

To enter or enact a retreat, is to draw together, in réfuge, seclusion,
separation, and sharing---not in order to abandon active life with
others, but to consider ourselves, with others. The choice to retreat,
to move to a space away yet in the world, can open up the possibility of
redressing forms of disparity and can disturb relations of power, even
if the act itself may seem a reduction of means or a lack of means
altogether. Retreat is not abandonment of social challenges, political
antinomies, or cultural dead ends, but a temporary condition whose
intent is to generate permanent change.

This part of this presentation is about this presentation.\
This Summer I made the decision to apply to another institution, the one
where I am studying at now. Guess I realized the need to take part in
the game. For else I would end up disconnecting fully, and how can you
research the withdrawal as a possibility for change if you don't have
anything to withdraw from? The final question would be then about my
presentation. Why did I not try to withdraw from this one? Perhaps I
tried a little. It is annoying when the rhetoric differs from the act.\
